>> [BACKGROUND MUSIC] And
I think many people today
don't know what to
believe anymore.
>>People are basically
going to keep on
to help uncover what
really happened.
>>I felt like something
was watching me.
>>We weren't given
all the information.
We weren't told
the entire story.
>>And now the host of the
nationally syndicated Coast
to Coast AM and Gaiam TV
bring you "Beyond Belief"
with George Noory.
>> GEORGE NOORY: Hey, and
welcome to "Beyond Belief."
Throughout history mankind
has wondered, who is he?
Where did he come from?
To be very spiritual, there
was one person on this planet
several thousand years
ago who had those answers,
and it was Jesus.
Our special guest
on "Beyond Belief,"
no, it's not going to be
Jesus, but pretty close.
Barrie Schwortz,
official photographer
for the Shroud of
Turin Research Project.
Barrie, welcome to the program.
[AUDIENCE APPLAUDING]
>> BARRIE SCHWORTZ: George.
>> NOORY: How are you?
>> SCHWORTZ: Good to see you.
>> NOORY: Good to see you too.
You're not Jesus.
>> SCHWORTZ: No, but--
>> NOORY: But you're
pretty darn close.
>> SCHWORTZ: Well, he was
a nice Jewish boy himself.
[AUDIENCE LAUGHING]
>> NOORY: How did you get
involved in the Shroud of Turin
Research Project?
>> SCHWORTZ: You know, I asked
myself that very same question
many years ago.
I operated a photographic
studio specializing
in scientific, medical,
technical photography.
And I was approached
by an organization that
was contracted to Los Alamos
National Laboratories,
and for seven
months they asked me
to be a photographic consultant
on their project, which
was interesting.
Of course, it was
about atomic bombs,
and if I tell you any more,
I have to kill everybody.
So--
>> NOORY: That's good.
>> SCHWORTZ: --we won't do that.
But after seven months,
that project ended,
and I went back to
my normal routine.
And the gentleman I'd
worked with maybe three four
weeks later called
me up and he said,
Barrie, what do you know
about the Shroud of Turin?
And I laughed, and I said,
but, Don, I'm Jewish.
And Don laughed because he
said, so am I. Remember?
Because he also was one of the
Jewish members of the team.
But to be more serious,
he explained to me
that some new properties
of the Shroud's image
had been visualized for the
first time by some scientists
over at Sandia Laboratories,
a sister lab to Los Alamos.
And he sort of explained
those properties to me.
And I immediately was
curious, because I
knew that those
were not properties
that could be incorporated
into a photographic image
or into an artwork.
And without getting
too technical,
it was the fact that
the lights and darks
of the image of the
Shroud are directly
proportionate to the distance
between the cloth and the body.
Well, that's not something
you can do photographically
or any other way that
I was familiar with,
so of course I was very
curious about this image.
But I was also
very uncomfortable,
because I was raised in
an orthodox Jewish home,
very much like
"Fiddler on the Roof,"
my mother and father
born in Poland.
My grandparents lived with us.
And so I didn't know
much about Jesus.
I knew he was
Jewish, but I really
didn't have any emotional
attachment to the subject.
And when it came to the Shroud,
even though I understood
it had this unique property,
I was still pretty convinced
that we would get to Turin
and I would take a look at it,
and I would see the paint
and the brush strokes
and come home.
And I was frankly thinking,
oh, free trip to Italy.
>> NOORY: Sure.
>> SCHWORTZ: So of course,
that was not exactly how it all
ended up.
But I did participate
in the examination
of the Shroud over a period
of five days and nights.
I did hold it in my own hands.
And basically, I kind
of got trapped into it.
I did try and quit at one point.
But one of the
other team members,
Don Linn of the Jet Propulsion
Lab, may he rest in peace,
he was a man in charge of
imaging on Voyager and Viking
and Mariner and
Galileo projects.
>> NOORY: He knew
what he was doing.
>> SCHWORTZ: My
hero on the team,
because this was a
real imaging expert,
from NASA of all places.
So he was the one
that sort of convinced
me to stay on the team.
I said to him one
day, gee, Don, what's
a nice Jewish boy
like me doing here?
He looked at me, and he
said kind of the same thing.
He says, well,
have you forgotten
the man in question's a Jew?
And I said, I know that.
And he says, oh,
you don't think God
wants one of his chosen
people on our team?
Well, then I laughed.
I said, no, I
never thought that.
And then he gave me some advice.
He said, look, you never know
in advance what the plan is.
Go to Turin, do the best job
you can do, and, in the end,
one day you'll understand why.
And so I listened to
him-- thank goodness
I did-- and stayed on that team.
And I'll share one more
quick thing about that.
I felt very privileged
to be in that room.
There were a billion
people on this planet who
had more right to
be there than I did.
>> NOORY: I understand.
>> SCHWORTZ: And yet for some
reason I was the guy that was
put there to be the documenting
photographer and record
the event and do some of
the scientific work as well.
And when I finished
with it all, I
felt a certain responsibility.
>> NOORY: Did you
feel mystical, Barrie?
>> SCHWORTZ: I didn't.
And I'm certain that's because
I didn't have any emotional--
>> NOORY: Ties to it.
>> SCHWORTZ: --ties to it.
>> NOORY: Yeah.
>> SCHWORTZ: I know that some
of the team members who were
Christian, I'm sure they did
and felt much more an emotional
response than I did.
But I was very neutral about it.
And frankly, it didn't
matter much to me.
Jesus didn't really mean
anything emotionally to me.
I didn't have that attachment.
But they say that Jews and
Catholics have cornered
the market on guilt,
and I was feeling guilty
when it was all finished that
I had somehow not finished
what I'd begun.
And so I felt that somehow
I had an obligation.
I was given a privilege
to be in that room,
and I felt that my obligation
was to fulfill that
by somehow sharing this
information with a broader
audience.
And obviously, that's
what I've done.
>> NOORY: Let's go back to
the beginning of the Shroud,
Barrie.
Jesus was crucified.
They wrapped him in this linen.
>> SCHWORTZ: Correct.
>> NOORY: Pick it up from there.
>> SCHWORTZ: So he
is wrapped in linen.
I want to make clear that he
was not wrapped like a mummy.
Although I know in the Gospels
it talks about strips of linen.
But as you'll see later, when
you wrap the shroud lengthwise
around a body, if you
try to move the body
the cloth's just going
to fall right off anyway.
So they would take
strips of linen, then,
and once the body was
wrapped into the cloth
they would wrap strips
around the chest
and the waist and
the feet so that when
the body, if it
were to be moved,
the cloth would stay in place.
When my father died in 2003, he
had an orthodox Jewish burial,
plain wooden coffin,
no embalming.
>> NOORY: Simple.
>> SCHWORTZ: Very simple.
And he was wrapped in
a very similar shroud.
The only difference was it
had been sewn along the edges.
So instead of just
being open, it
was more like a
mummy bag would be,
if you're familiar with camping.
>> NOORY: And for Jesus, it was
put on the bottom and the top,
right?
>> SCHWORTZ: He was laid into
it with his feet at one end,
his head in the center, and
then it was wrapped over--
>> NOORY: Pulled right over him.
>> SCHWORTZ: --the body
back down to his feet.
>> NOORY: And kind of just
dropped right on him right?
>> SCHWORTZ: Exactly.
Exactly.
And although it mentions these
strips of linen in the Gospel--
because remember, it
was Friday evening.
The Sabbath was
fast approaching.
There was no question
that it was forbidden
to work on the Sabbath, and
they didn't have digital clocks.
So as the sun went down,
they were pressed for time.
They did not complete
the burial preparations
as would have been normal.
>> NOORY: OK.
>> SCHWORTZ: And the
intent was to come back.
And I think it says so
in the New Testament.
The intent was to
come back on Sunday
to complete what they hadn't
been able to complete Friday
evening.
>> NOORY: Ah, what a surprise
for them on Sunday, huh?
>> SCHWORTZ: Well, I never
argue where the body went,
so I don't feel that
that's my place.
>> NOORY: So they
put him in the tomb.
>> SCHWORTZ: They
put him in a tomb.
>> NOORY: They roll a pretty
large rock in front of it,
and Roman Centurions are
guarding the tomb, right?
>> SCHWORTZ: That's correct.
>> NOORY: Three days
later, what happens?
>> SCHWORTZ: Well, apparently--
Let me qualify the three days.
If you look at
the time frame, it
was actually only
about 36 hours.
>> NOORY: OK.
>> SCHWORTZ: But in
the Jewish calendar,
when the Sabbath begins
on sundown on Saturday,
that's the second day.
And then the morning--
>> NOORY: And then
the morning of.
>> SCHWORTZ: Yeah.
So really it was about
36 hours, perhaps.
But on the third day,
obviously they go to the tomb.
The tomb is open.
The body's gone.
And as I said a
moment ago, I don't
argue where the body went.
I don't know where
the body went.
>> NOORY: And I assume the
Centurions were there all
the time, right?
>> SCHWORTZ: Well,
that I'm not sure of.
Again, I'm sure that
it talks about that
in the New Testament.
Not being a New
Testament scholar,
I have to sort of proclaim
my ignorance in places.
I'm not afraid to say
even on television
that I don't know the
answer to that specifically.
>> NOORY: The body is gone.
The Shroud is where?
>> SCHWORTZ: The Shroud
remains in place.
And many people who are
skeptical of the Shroud
point out that in the Gospels
it talks about two cloths.
It says there was the
Shroud, and then there
was the one cloth folded
and separate from the other.
That would've been
the face cloth.
Even today it's
still very common.
If somebody's killed
in an accident,
the very first thing we
do is cover their face.
>> NOORY: Right.
Right.
>> SCHWORTZ: It's a tradition
that goes back even prior
to the Jewish
tradition, I believe.
It probably goes
back to pagan times.
And I think that
what they would have
done would have been as he
was brought off the cross,
they would have immediately
covered his face.
And then once he was
brought to the tomb,
they would have separated that.
But they would've kept it there,
because Jewish law requires
that any blood-soaked cloth
be buried with the body.
>> NOORY: OK.
>> SCHWORTZ: So it would
have been in the tomb.
It would have been separate
from the main burial shroud.
And as a matter of fact, if you
look into the New Testament,
and they talk about this,
there are many people who
reject the Shroud saying,
well, there are two cloths.
The Shroud is one.
Most people are not
aware that there
is a face cloth called
the Sudarium of Oviedo.
It's in Oviedo, Spain.
It is a blood and
fluid-soaked cloth.
You can see where the
nose and the mouth were.
It had been wrapped
around a man's head.
Some of the blood
stains on the Sudarium
match some of the blood
stains on the head
of the Man of the Shroud.
>> NOORY: Now was that from the
crucifixion and the cloth they
put over his head?
Or was that the woman
who wiped his face?
>> SCHWORTZ: Ah, the Veronica.
>> NOORY: Yeah.
>> SCHWORTZ: That is a legend.
There's no evidence of that,
and it's not really mentioned--
>> NOORY: The Veil of Veronica.
>> SCHWORTZ: The Veil
of Veronica is a legend,
not mentioned in the gospels.
I believe it was from
some letters that
were written by some of
the disciples or someone
afterwards, but it's not
mentioned in the gospels.
What is mentioned, of course,
is the shroud and the face
cloth, both of which
still exist to this day.
I actually was given the
privilege a year ago,
I was in Spain,
and they actually
opened up the reliquarium
and the reliquary,
and they showed me the Sudarium.
And what's so
fascinating about it
is that there's blood
stains on it that
are consistent and
shaped the same
as some of the blood stains
on the Man of the Shroud.
>> NOORY: Can you see a face?
>> SCHWORTZ: There's no face.
But you could see where
the nose and the mouth
were, because there's
fluid that was coming out.
In other words, there's no
image on the Sudarium cloth.
>> NOORY: But this
individual, call him Jesus,
was in excruciating
pain, must have been.
>> SCHWORTZ: There's
no doubt about it.
>> NOORY: Tortured.
>> SCHWORTZ: Tortured horribly.
>> NOORY: Yeah.
>> SCHWORTZ: So he would have
been beaten severely about
the face and shoulders.
And the scourge marks, which
you'll see, about 120 of them
on the Shroud.
>> NOORY: Oh my gosh.
>> SCHWORTZ: So he
was really tortured.
And whether you're a Christian,
a Jew, or don't care at all,
I don't know how somebody
could look at that image
and see what was
done to this man
and not feel some empathy
just as a human being for what
this man suffered.
>> NOORY: Whoever
he might have been.
>> SCHWORTZ: Whoever he was.
He really suffered.
And obviously, people
often say to me, well,
how do you know it's Jesus?
We don't have his fingerprints,
his DNA, and his mug shot.
>> NOORY: Yet.
>> SCHWORTZ: Although even if
we did, I'd be very hesitant--
I would expect many people
would deny it anyway.
But how do we know it's Jesus?
Well, the Romans
crucified a lot of people.
They speared a lot of people.
They scourged a lot of people.
But to our knowledge
there's only one man,
a man who proclaimed himself
the King of the Jews,
and so to humiliate him
they gave him a crown.
They took a nasty thorn
bush and smacked it--
>> NOORY: Jammed
it into his head.
>> SCHWORTZ: --onto his head.
Now some people say, well,
in the artworks it always
shows a beautiful
woven thorn crown.
>> NOORY: Baloney.
>> SCHWORTZ: Can you imagine
telling a Roman soldier,
you're about to execute this
guy, but before you do that,
take some thorns and
make a pretty crown?
Well, that's artistic
license, George.
>> NOORY: I'm sure the person
who made the crown cut his
hands trying to
put that together.
>> SCHWORTZ: I'm sure that
whoever the poor Roman soldier
was given that task grabbed a
bush and just smashed it onto
his head.
>> NOORY: Just
wheeled it around.
>> SCHWORTZ: And we have
blood stains all over this
man's head.
>> NOORY: We're going
to talk more about that.
Let's take some questions
for Barrie Schwortz
here as we talk about
the Shroud of Turin.
An incredible story.
Was it indeed the
image of Jesus when
he was crucified
a long time ago?
And we're going to get into
the possibility of the DNA
testing, the carbon dating, and
what it all meant, but let's
take some of your
questions for Barrie.
Who's got one?
There you go.
Yes, sir.
>> AUDIENCE: When you were
taking the photographs,
did you have any problems
with your equipment batteries
running down quickly or anything
like that that some people
experienced in
similar situations?
>> SCHWORTZ: When we
made the photographs,
the time that I was given
to make the photographs,
which was several different
times within the five days
and nights that we examined
the cloth-- and of course,
during the examination
by other scientists,
I was documenting their work--
I never had any problems.
But then I was well-planned.
I was a professional.
I had plenty of spare batteries.
I wore kind of a
fisherman's vest,
and there were pockets
full of film and batteries
and whatever other accessories
that typical photographers
might use.
And so I was well-equipped.
Lenses, I had several
lenses in my pockets.
So I was well-covered.
But again, we spent almost
two years planning the event.
And then we had
five days and nights
to actually perform those tests.
But nothing extraordinary
happened equipment-wise,
and the resulting photographs
are a testament to that.
>> NOORY: But whatever
created that image,
whether it's was a painting--
and I have my doubts--
or a burst of
energy from a body,
that moment must have been
literally electrifying.
>> SCHWORTZ: Well, because
there's no witnesses
to the event that occurred in
the tomb, there's speculation.
There are people who
wrote about light.
People have written that perhaps
it was some form of radiation.
None of those have
proven to be viable
based on the physical
and chemical properties
of the image itself.
And remembering that our
team, which was there
to sort of test all of
the conventional theories
of the Shroud, we prepared
by bringing with us
the kind of equipment
that would be
used for authentication
of artwork.
Obviously conventional wisdom,
including my personal beliefs,
I'm going to get there,
see the paint, and be done.
>> NOORY: Da Vinci
did it, right?
>> SCHWORTZ: Well, I
don't know about that.
But the point is it might
be some form of artwork.
So we brought with
us the infrared
and the ultraviolet
fluorescence photography.
>> NOORY: Did you rule that out?
>> SCHWORTZ: Yeah.
Artwork has been ruled
out, because we did--
>> NOORY: Oh, boy.
>> SCHWORTZ: --mass
spectrometry,
which was sensitive enough to
be able to detect parts per
billion of any
paints or pigments.
>> NOORY: OK.
>> SCHWORTZ: And we had spectral
data of every paint and pigment
that had been used from
medieval to modern times.
>> NOORY: You would have seen
any paintings on it, right?
>> SCHWORTZ: We would have
seen it in the microscopy.
It would've been detected
by the spectral data.
We found no paints or pigments.
There were a few particles
of red iron oxide, which,
of course, has allowed
skeptics to attack it.
Oh, red iron oxide's a pigment.
>> NOORY: Could they fake it
today with today's technology?
>> SCHWORTZ: It's
interesting, a great question.
I've looked at probably every
attempt in the last 35 years
to duplicate the
Shroud, many of them
using my photographs as a basis.
No one's even come close.
>> NOORY: They
still can't do it.
>> SCHWORTZ: There's not one
person that's matched any
of the chemical or
physical properties.
So it's easy to
make something that
looks like the image
of the Shroud--
>> NOORY: But when
you investigate it--
>> SCHWORTZ: --but when you
look at it more carefully,
when you look at the chemistry
and you look at the physics,
no one's even come
close, not even close.
>> NOORY: God, that's exciting.
>> SCHWORTZ: It is.
>> NOORY: Because do
you know what it means?
We'll talk about that too.
Let's take some more
questions for Barrie.
Who's got one?
Yes, sir.
>> AUDIENCE: So you said
that you had tried to leave
the program before, but you
were intrigued enough to stay.
What was it that intrigued you?
And what it did you find most
intriguing about the Shroud?
>> SCHWORTZ: I can give you the
same answer to both of those
questions.
The image on this
piece of cloth is
unlike any other
image I've seen.
And of course, as a
professional photographer
charged with creating
images, and then
as a guy who's been involved
with the Shroud publicly
for so long, I've
looked at every effort
that people have
made to duplicate it.
And, you know, it
just boggles my mind
that even using my high
resolution images, folks
who have tried to
duplicate it and say, look,
we made it look like the Shroud,
thus proving it's a fake,
but as soon as we examine
their result, comparing it
to the chemistry and physics
that we have documented
on the Shroud, and
which is published
in the peer-reviewed
scientific literature--
this isn't published in
magazines or commercial books
or TV documentaries.
It's published in peer-reviewed
scientific journals,
some of the highest
caliber journals-- no one
has come close.
And frankly-- somebody
once said to me,
what if I gave you $1 million?
Could you duplicate it?
I said, push the
money right back.
Because after all
these years of study,
I'm no closer to an explanation
of how this image could form
with these chemical
and physical properties
than I was the day
I first saw it.
>> NOORY: Barrie, is there
any blood on the Shroud?
>> SCHWORTZ: There is a lot of
blood on the Shroud, George.
One of the most
prominent blood stains
is the spear wound bloodstain.
It is the actually darkest
blood stain on the cloth.
There are blood stains
covering the head.
at the arms or wrists.
But remember, we only
see the back of one.
>> NOORY: It all
matches up, doesn't it?
>> SCHWORTZ: It does.
>> NOORY: Gosh.
>> SCHWORTZ: And as
a matter of fact,
something very unique about
the blood stain at the wrist.
Most artists have
always depicted
Jesus crucified
through the palms.
But forensically, that's not
a very good thing, especially
for a strong man.
He could tear himself lose.
So they would--
>> NOORY: It's really
right around here, right?
>> SCHWORTZ: Yeah.
If you put your thumb and
little finger together,
it forms a groove called
the thenar furrow.
And that's a perfect
thing for a Roman soldier
to do that, stick a nail there,
drive it through at an angle,
and you would see
an exit wound right
where we see it on the Shroud.
>> NOORY: They couldn't
have done it here.
That would have killed
him immediately, right?
>> SCHWORTZ: Well, it
wouldn't have killed him,
but it would have been a
probably more difficult place
to drive through.
In this fleshy part of
the palm-- and ironically,
the skeptics again say,
well, it says hand.
It doesn't say palm.
In Greek there's no difference.
The word for hand
means hand and palm.
>> NOORY: I'll tell you a great
story that matches up exactly
with what you were just saying.
When I was producing
a television show back
in Detroit, I'm 26 years
old, and we had scripts.
We had scripts like this.
They were all piled up.
And at the end of a newscast,
we had a paper spindle, right?
You know what that is?
It's one of those
little spike thing.
So I did this, and you would
do that after every show.
And the next morning the
next guy would get it,
read the scripts that you used
during newscast at the night.
Well, I did that and missed.
>> SCHWORTZ: Uh-oh.
>> NOORY: My hand went
right through the spindle.
I didn't feel it at all.
My director looked at me
and went, oh my god, George.
>> SCHWORTZ: You're bleeding.
>> NOORY: This thing is
sticking right through here.
He pulled it right out.
Not one piece of blood came out.
But there was a hole there,
and it was right in there.
>> SCHWORTZ: Well, the spindle
that probably impaled you would
have been probably thinner and
perhaps more sharp than a Roman
crucifixion nail, which are
little rough and coarse.
>> NOORY: And rusty.
>> SCHWORTZ: And rusty.
And they get wider as they
go up toward the head.
>> NOORY: Made out
of iron or wood?
>> SCHWORTZ: Made out
of iron, most likely.
And so it would have left
a bit more of a hole.
And we do see a blood
stain, but we see it
on the back of the wrist,
which is forensically correct,
unlike all of the
artworks that are
typical of depicting the
crucifixion of Jesus, which
typically show it
through the palm.
It's interesting to note
that contemporary artists who
have learned about the Shroud
are now showing the nail
wound a little closer to the
wrist, which is accurately
depicted on the Shroud as well.
So I think the Shroud is
having some influence on more
modern artists.
>> NOORY: Can we do a
DNA study on the blood?
>> SCHWORTZ: Interestingly
enough, in 1995, George,
a DNA study was done.
It was done by two scientists at
the University of Texas Health
Science Center in San Antonio.
>> NOORY: We've got
better technology now.
>> SCHWORTZ: We have
But they did a DNA analysis.
They were able to determine
that the blood on the shroud
is male, human, normal DNA.
But it was very old
and very degraded,
so there wouldn't be enough
there to create a full profile.
>> NOORY: Ah.
>> SCHWORTZ: And when
people bring up DNA,
I always remind them DNA
analysis is a comparative
analysis.
You find a sample.
You get a profile.
You get the bad guy.
You take his DNA.
If they match, that's your man.
But if you don't have
a complete DNA profile
based on the age of the sample
or the conditions under which
it might have been
stored, there's
not a lot more they
can do with it.
And so my answer
is even if we had
a full profile of the Man of the
Shroud, which we probably never
could because it's so old, who
are we going to compare it to?
So it really becomes a
real kind of a moot point.
But DNA is a buzz word.
We've all seen the TV
shows and everything,
and we're much more aware of it
and aware of how important it
is in the forensic sciences.
So I think that the question
comes up often, well,
can they clone something
from the Shroud?
I think there's
some movies and TV
shows that have been
based on that, some books.
You can't clone something
without, again, a complete DNA
profile.
So no, we're not going to clone
the Antichrist from the Shroud.
>> NOORY: Even if you clone
Jesus, even if you cloned him,
he doesn't have his soul.
>> SCHWORTZ: Well, and
that's the other thing.
Again, I don't from a
philosophical point of view
have any strong feelings one
way or the other about cloning.
I know that it's
used in many places
where it's a beneficial thing.
Some of the more
wild-eyed theories of,
like I said, cloning the
Antichrist from the blood
of the Shroud is sort
of silly and, obviously,
is not going to happen,
and it isn't possible.
But I believe this.
Considering that the Shroud
of Turin has become the most
studied artifact in modern
human history with more science
applied to it than any
other artifact of the Church
or of Christianity in general,
and we still cannot provide
a means to make an image with
these exact same properties,
pretty convincing evidence to
me that this is not a fake.
It only took me 18
years after holding it
in my hand to be fully
convinced, so I didn't rush.
>> NOORY: So you went in
thinking it wasn't real.
>> SCHWORTZ: I went in thinking
not only it wasn't real,
I was going to see the paint
and go, oh, time to go home.
>> NOORY: Got you.
>> SCHWORTZ: Done.
10 minutes.
>> NOORY: What about the date?
It's been carbon
dated a couple times.
>> SCHWORTZ: That's a
whole other story, George.
The carbon dating
was done in 1988.
They took a little
piece from one corner.
They cut that in half.
>> NOORY: Was this
before or after the fire?
There was a fire, right?
>> SCHWORTZ: There
was a fire in 1997.
>> NOORY: OK.
>> SCHWORTZ: And there was
a fire in 1532, of course,
that was responsible for all the
burns and scorches that we see.
>> NOORY: OK.
>> SCHWORTZ: There may have
been something in between,
but nothing that put the Shroud
at great risk the way those
did.
So they take this
one little sample
from this one little corner.
And from that one sample--
they cut it in half
then take half of it
and cut it in thirds,
give each to the three
different radiocarbon labs.
I was fortunate in
August of last year
to go to the Arizona laboratory
and photograph the remaining
samples that they still
have left from the Shroud,
and we've posted
that on our site.
People can find that.
>> NOORY: Shroud.com
>> SCHWORTZ: Shroud.com.
>> NOORY: We'll talk about that.
>> SCHWORTZ: Right.
And so as far as the
carbon dating goes,
the results came out.
The Shroud is medieval.
It must be a hoax.
As a matter of fact,
one of the scientists
who did the dating said that
anybody who still believes
the Shroud's authentic should
belong to the Flat Earth
Society.
>> NOORY: Oh, no.
>> SCHWORTZ: So
for about 20 years,
I was a member of the Flat
Earth Society, apparently.
[AUDIENCE LAUGHING]
>> NOORY: And
didn't even know it.
>> SCHWORTZ: Well, I didn't
know it because here's why.
There is strong scientific
and historic evidence
that says the Shroud is older.
I was familiar with that
because of my studies
and my examination of it.
And so I was very
comfortable knowing
that there had to be something
wrong with the carbon dating.
But look, I'm not a physicist.
I don't claim to be smarter
than the guys who did this work.
But there was something
questionable about it,
which it took about 12 years
before new science was done
that came to light that
showed us what was wrong.
>> NOORY: What happened?
>> SCHWORTZ: What happened?
They took one little sample
from one little corner.
They took no other samples from
anywhere else on the Shroud.
>> NOORY: So they
couldn't come up with--
>> SCHWORTZ: So there's
no point of comparison.
>> NOORY: --the variety.
Right.
>> SCHWORTZ: They couldn't tell
if what they were testing there
was the same as what
was at the other corner.
And so they did this test.
They released the results
with huge fanfare.
It was media frenzy worldwide.
>> NOORY: I was on
top of that story.
>> SCHWORTZ: Shroud is a fake.
Shroud is a fake.
And those of us who understood
and knew about all the science
were bothered, mainly not
by what the findings were
but by the way it was portrayed
and by the fact that all
the other evidence
was tossed out.
Normally in the real
scientific community,
you ask any archaeologist,
physicist, you do 100 tests.
99 point in one direction.
One points the
opposite direction.
It's called an outlier.
What do they do with that?
They discard it.
In the case of the Shroud,
they did the opposite.
They kept the one test
that said it was a fake,
and all the other tests--
>> NOORY: Discarded that.
>> SCHWORTZ: --they just threw
it away as if it didn't count
at all.
And remember, this
isn't just stuff
published in personal
journals or websites or blogs.
This is published in
peer-reviewed scientific
journals.
>> NOORY: So how old do we
think the Shroud is now?
>> SCHWORTZ: Well, I think
the Shroud is old enough to be
the cloth that wrapped Jesus.
I don't have any
problem accepting that.
>> NOORY: Has science
backed that up?
>> SCHWORTZ: Science, aside
from that one radiocarbon dating
test, generally does, yes.
>> NOORY: It does.
OK.
>> SCHWORTZ: Now I want to
quickly share a quick story.
My 89-year-old Jewish mother
heard one of my lectures
for the first time in person
about eight years ago.
We were driving back at
the end of the lecture,
and she was very quiet.
And a quiet Jewish
mother is very scary.
[AUDIENCE LAUGHING]
>> SCHWORTZ: So we're
sitting there in the car.
And I finally turned
to her, and I said, OK,
mother, what do you think?
Because I'm curious what a
little Jewish lady, immigrant
from Poland, came through
Ellis Island at age seven,
what she thought of all this.
And she looked at me in typical
Jewish mother style and says,
Barrie, they wouldn't have
kept it for 2,000 years
if it belonged to anybody else.
It wouldn't matter.
So I thought how cute
and clever that was.
But the more I thought
of it, the more
I realized what a real profound
observation that really is.
Why do we have this
piece of cloth?
Burial cloths typically
going in the grave.
They decay with the body.
They're organic,
the body's organic,
and so we might find little
bits and pieces of and remnants.
Yet this burial shroud, which
is obviously a burial shroud,
was separated from the body
before any liquefaction,
within 36 or so hours,
before any oozing of decay
came out of the body.
>> NOORY: Does that
happen when you die?
>> SCHWORTZ: It does
happen when you die.
But depending on the
humidity, the temperature,
the conditions, it
could take anywhere
from just 20 hours, 24
hours, up to 48 hours.
>> NOORY: OK.
>> SCHWORTZ: But generally
you start to get--
>> NOORY: But it does happen.
>> SCHWORTZ: Yeah.
And it starts to
smell pretty bad.
>> NOORY: All right.
>> SCHWORTZ: So I think that
my mother's great observation
there is sort of
right on the money.
Why would they have
bothered to keep this?
If it belonged to
somebody unimportant,
they would have thrown it away.
It wouldn't have
mattered to anyone.
And yet what we have here is
an authentic first century
Jewish burial shroud.
If you use the ancient
method of measurement,
it's four cubits by
one cubit precisely.
>> NOORY: Well, let's look at
the comparisons to the Bible--
>> SCHWORTZ: Sure.
>> NOORY: --and see what they
said about the crucifixion.
>> SCHWORTZ: Sure.
>> NOORY: All right.
Thorns in the head.
>> SCHWORTZ: Absolutely.
>> NOORY: Does the
Shroud show that?
>> SCHWORTZ: Absolutely.
>> NOORY: The spike
marks in the hands.
>> SCHWORTZ: We talked
about that, yes.
We only can see the
back of one, but we
know he was
crucified, absolutely.
>> NOORY: The wound on the side.
>> SCHWORTZ: The spear wound
on the side, absolutely.
>> NOORY: What about
the spike in the feet?
>> SCHWORTZ: Absolutely.
There are blood
stains on the feet.
We can only see the
back of one heel
and the flat of the other
foot, both covered with blood.
So we cannot tell if there was
a single or two nails used.
Some people believe that
it was a single nail,
and many artists have depicted
one foot over the other.
I don't know.
If I were on the
cross and somebody
were trying to nail my feet
to it and I had one foot free,
I'd be kicking that guy.
>> NOORY: So everything on the
Shroud that could be authentic
in terms of time-- let's not
even talk about who was in that
shroud, who was covered by it--
matches up with the description
in the New Testament.
>> SCHWORTZ: And we haven't even
mentioned the 120 scourge marks
that cover this man's body
with dumbbell-shaped bruises,
many of them tore the flesh,
made by a Roman flagrum,
a known weapon, a whip used
by the Romans for torture.
>> NOORY: Unbelievable.
>> SCHWORTZ: So everything
matches, everything.
>> NOORY: The face on the
Shroud, it's a negative, right?
It's got a reverse negative?
That's what I always heard.
>> SCHWORTZ: I hear that.
And it's kind of
a confusing thing,
being a photographer of course.
I believe the easiest way to
say it is that the Shroud has
one property very much like
a photographic negative,
and that is that the lights
and the darks of the image
are reversed from what
we're used to seeing.
We're used to seeing light
highlights, dark shadows.
And on the Shroud,
the lights and darks,
the way we would normally
expect to see, are reversed.
So when you make a
photograph of the Shroud
and look at the
negative, suddenly it
takes on a much more natural and
pleasing form with the lights
and darks back to
what we would perceive
like a black and
white photograph.
>> NOORY: If the
Shroud is authentic,
and you believe it is--
>> SCHWORTZ: I believe it is.
>> NOORY: --tell me
scientifically how it would
have been created.
What happened?
Explain the science behind it.
>> SCHWORTZ: Well,
I will say this,
that our team went to Turin
primarily to answer a single
question.
How is the image formed?
>> NOORY: Right.
>> SCHWORTZ: And of course,
the conventional wisdom was
painting, photography,
scorching of some form, artwork.
And so we took all the
tests to examine that.
We examined all that.
We eliminated all
those as possibilities.
And so our goal, which was to
answer the single question how
was the image formed, we
were unable to answer.
We could tell you what it's
not, not a painting, not
a photograph, not
a scorch, and we
did all the tests
that proved that.
>> NOORY: Which all the
skeptics claimed it was.
>> SCHWORTZ: They still do to
this day, some of them, George.
But we have published
science, incredible scientific
literature that shows
it's none of those.
And yet we could not come
up with a single mechanism
of any sort, especially a
naturally occurring mechanism,
that could account
for the physical
and chemical properties
of the image.
That being said, there
was a theory by one
of the chemists
who was on our team
from Los Alamos National
Laboratory, 35 years
emeritus from Los Alamos,
Ray Rogers, passed away now.
Rogers, being a
chemist, wanted to see
if he could find some chemical
method that might explain it.
The way the ancient
cloth was made,
after it was woven together
it was kind of stiff.
They would soak it in a
naturally occurring detergent
or softener called
saponaria, soap weed.
And that was known by
first century time.
They could soften the cloth up.
They would then rinse it
and dry it in the air,
meaning it dried by
evaporation, leaving
a residue of this saponaria on
the top surface of the fibers.
Well, that happens to
be a pentose sugar.
I don't want to get
into too much chemistry
because it's not my
field, but it's a sugar.
So Rogers was saying, OK,
we found this on the cloth.
What would cause the
discoloration of that?
And he found that--
>> NOORY: Besides aging?
>> SCHWORTZ: Besides
aging itself,
he found that the amines, the
ammonia gas and other gases
called heavier amines,
putrescine, cadaverine--
>> NOORY: That came
out of the body.
>> SCHWORTZ: --that
come out of the body.
Would create a chemical
reaction with this pentose sugar
on the surface of
the fibers, which
is where the image resides,
doesn't penetrate in
like paint would.
He felt and he demonstrated
with experiments
that you could
discolor and kind of
cause a yellowing, a slight
browning of that sugar,
causing the image.
And it would also account
for that correlation
of image density to distance.
Because the farther
away the body
was from the cloth,
the less of that--
>> NOORY: You have.
>> SCHWORTZ: --escaping
gases would be.
Now that theory is not well
accepted by many people,
in part, I believe,
because many people don't
feel that's miraculous enough.
Somebody once wrote me
and said, why would God
use such a simple mundane
method to make an image?
And my answer is I don't know.
Ask God.
>> NOORY: Ask God.
>> SCHWORTZ: Because
I have no idea.
And if God is truly God, he
can do whatever he wants.
>> NOORY: Here's my theory, and
you tell me how far off I am.
>> SCHWORTZ: OK.
>> SCHWORTZ: We're all energy.
>> NOORY: All of us--
>> SCHWORTZ: I agree.
>> NOORY: --are about
14 billion years old.
>> SCHWORTZ: That's true.
>> NOORY: The energy that we
have in our bodies is the same
energy that was around when
the universe was formed.
>> SCHWORTZ: That's true.
>> NOORY: It's just molded.
It's turned into who we
are and everything else,
but it's still 14
billion years old.
Do you remember "Star Trek"
when they were beamed aboard?
They would get into
this little teleporter,
and down to some
planet they would go.
But they would kind of like
twinkle, and they'd be gone.
>> SCHWORTZ: That's true.
>> NOORY: Because there was
no body, we don't think,
my theory is-- now think of
all the things I just said--
>> SCHWORTZ: Sure.
>> NOORY: --is that after they
covered the body up, Jesus,
who truly was part of this
divine creation, as we all are,
had the ability to
literally disintegrate.
>> SCHWORTZ: Dematerialize.
>> NOORY: Dematerialize.
And that process
created the energy
that beamed that
image on the Shroud.
And so the body was gone,
but the image of that--
>> SCHWORTZ: Remained on
the surface of the cloth.
>> NOORY: --remained on it.
>> SCHWORTZ: That is actually
one of the theories of one
of the members of our team
who believes there was
a dematerialization of the body.
So that is a theory that
I've heard proposed before.
The only problem with
that is it steps out
of the realm of known science
into an area of speculation.
>> NOORY: But things happen
without known science.
We know that.
>> SCHWORTZ: I absolutely
agree with that.
>> NOORY: Let's take
it a step further.
>> SCHWORTZ: Sure.
>> NOORY: This is preposterous.
>> SCHWORTZ: OK.
I'm ready.
>> NOORY: What if Jesus-- and
this is not negating my belief
in God by any means--
>> SCHWORTZ: I understand.
>> NOORY: What if Jesus
was an extraterrestrial,
came to this planet
to teach human beings,
and they beamed him back?
They just took the body back up.
>> SCHWORTZ: Well, that's
an interesting theory.
>> NOORY: That's another theory.
>> SCHWORTZ: I have no
way to challenge that,
nor would I want to.
>> NOORY: Technologically,
they'd have the capability
to do that.
>> SCHWORTZ: I would assume
that would be the case.
But remembering that I was
a member of the only really
scientific team ever
to examine this cloth,
and now that many of
them have passed on,
I'm sort of the last guy--
>> NOORY: You're it.
>> SCHWORTZ: I'm one of
the last ones standing,
and I feel that I am obligated,
because what I learned from
them about science and
empiricism and honesty
and integrity, I am compelled
to stay within the realm of--
>> NOORY: What you know.
>> SCHWORTZ: --natural sciences,
because that was our goal.
That was what our
team was there to do.
Now, do I eliminate the
supernatural possibilities?
Absolutely not.
>> NOORY: Because you can't.
>> SCHWORTZ: No.
And when questions come
to me-- and people always
send me things, look what we saw
in the Shroud-- I always say,
well, look, I can give
you one of two answers.
Do you want the scientific
answer or the other one?
And they always say, well, start
with the scientific answer.
And I say, OK, there's no
scientific explanation that
can account for what
you just described.
I say, but the other
explanation is this.
I can't speak for God.
And God can do
whatever he wants.
So if you have seen something
on that cloth that has moved you
in some way, who am I to
say that you're wrong?
I cannot see through
someone else's eyes.
And it would be inappropriate
and, I think, ignorant of me
to challenge people.
And also, I'd be arguing with
people every minute of my life.
So it's much easier
to understand
that there's a scientific
explanation-- we can answer
certain questions--
and then there's
a more spiritual,
religious, if you will,
aspect of it, which this cloth
is very significant to about
a billion people on this planet.
And so I am not going
to step on their toes
and challenge them in an area
that's, A, I'm not a Christian.
I cannot challenge Christianity
or, for that matter,
even Judaism.
>> NOORY: But you can tell
them it's not a painting.
>> SCHWORTZ: I can say
it's not a painting,
it's not a photograph,
and it's not a scorch.
And we've proven
that, which is not
a word you'll hear me use often.
Ray Rogers used to call
me up and yell at me when
he saw that I wrote
proven on the website.
He says, it takes an
awful lot of evidence
to consider something proven.
We don't have enough
to call that proven.
Take that down.
Yes, sir.
>> NOORY: If it's
not a painting,
if it wasn't created by
mankind, like da Vinci--
>> SCHWORTZ: Not by the hand.
>> NOORY: Not by the hand.
What the heck is it?
>> SCHWORTZ: That's a question
I've been asking for 35 years,
George.
And I'm still not much
closer to an answer.
>> NOORY: You're baffled.
>> SCHWORTZ: I'm baffled,
as is most science.
Now look, people of
faith look at this
from a completely different
point of view than I do.
>> NOORY: They have
their answer right there.
>> SCHWORTZ: They
have an answer.
They say, it's proof
of the Resurrection.
So people ask me that question.
Does this prove
the Resurrection?
Well, if in the Gospels they
had described the Resurrection
event in some form, then
perhaps we could say, oh, yeah,
that matches up with
the Gospel accounts,
because the rest of it
matches pretty well.
>> NOORY: Well, it's
pretty darn close.
>> SCHWORTZ: Well, but
nobody witnessed the event.
>> NOORY: No, nobody did.
>> SCHWORTZ: And my
answer is always, look,
if we could go into the
laboratory and resurrect
people, we could see what
kind of images we get.
>> NOORY: But the apostles
who saw the body of Christ
afterward standing with them--
>> SCHWORTZ: They did.
>> NOORY: --before he
resurrected and ascended saw
a body--
>> SCHWORTZ: They did.
>> NOORY: --that
somehow rematerialized,
if you believe those accounts.
>> SCHWORTZ: And look, I
certainly wouldn't challenge
them.
But like I said, from
my point of view,
being a photographer dealing
with tangible materials,
if we could resurrect
people as something
that was part of
our science, then we
could see what
impacts it would be.
And perhaps we would
find, yes, that makes
exactly an image like this.
>> NOORY: But the
bottom line is,
ruling out a hand painting
and all these other things,
you don't know what it is.
>> SCHWORTZ: I can
tell you what it's not,
but I can't tell you what it is.
>> NOORY: And that alone
is a great mystery.
>> SCHWORTZ: It certainly is.
>> NOORY: We're going to take
some questions for Barrie
Schwortz here while we
have some time left.
Yes.
>> AUDIENCE: In Tibet there's
been documented evidence
of high lamas attaining what
they call the luminous rainbow
body.
There's that, where when
they die all that's left
is hair and fingernails.
There's another
piece of that, which
is called the great transfer
where they completely dissolve
into light, and this has been
witnessed and documented.
Have you heard about this?
>> SCHWORTZ: I haven't really--
I perhaps vaguely have heard
about it but never
very specifically,
so I really don't have
much information about it.
But look, I've been
doing this long enough
to learn never to speak
in absolute terms.
>> NOORY: But done by human
beings who might have had
the same techniques
that Jesus had.
>> SCHWORTZ: Perhaps.
>> AUDIENCE: I've met people
who have witnessed it.
>> SCHWORTZ: And I certainly
don't challenge those things,
because I've learned-- one of
the things about getting older
is you come to realize
just how smart you're not.
And so I've come to understand
that, although I may have
my point of view from a direct
examination and the science
that we did, there's so much
beyond that that I don't know
and that I don't understand,
I would be a real fool
to get up and publicly
challenge things
that I don't understand myself.
So I accept that all of these
are other possibilities.
But I'm always stuck back with
that sort of tangible science,
because that's what
we did, and that's
how I examined that cloth.
And trust me, I had my face
this close to it, thus leaving--
>> NOORY: You wanted to
prove it was painted.
>> SCHWORTZ: Yeah, I pretty
much did, yeah, George.
>> NOORY: But you
couldn't do it.
>> SCHWORTZ: Not
only couldn't I do.
I eventually became
convinced just the opposite.
And of course, by
breathing on it like that,
I left my DNA on it too.
And one of the problems
with DNA analysis
on the Shroud, contamination.
It's been kissed and loved
and hugged and breathed on
and touched by thousands of
people through its history.
How do you know whose DNA
you're actually testing?
>> NOORY: All right.
So one day they'll test
it 2,000 years from now,
and some guy will say, no,
no, that was Barrie Schwortz.
>> SCHWORTZ: That was an
old hippie Jewish guy from
Colorado.
>> NOORY: That's who it was.
Do this.
Put your hands over like that.
>> SCHWORTZ: There you go.
>> NOORY: See, you never know.
>> SCHWORTZ: I match right up.
>> NOORY: How about another
question for Barrie?
Who's got one?
Yeah.
Right behind you.
>> AUDIENCE: What is
the Shroud made out of?
And how has it been
preserved for 2,000 years
without modern
preservation methods?
>> SCHWORTZ: Yes.
The Shroud is made of pure woven
linen, which, interestingly
enough, is specified
in the Old Testament
and is a requirement
for a Jewish burial
cloth, particularly of
someone of higher stature.
The Gospels tell
us it was provided
by Joseph of Arimathea,
a wealthy man.
It doesn't tell us much else
about Joseph but the fact
that they say he
was a wealthy man.
This kind of herringbone weave
would have been manufactured.
And probably the nearest
place would have been Syria.
And so it would have had to come
on a caravan on a camel's back.
It would have been imported
thus into Jerusalem
and would have been an
expensive piece of cloth.
Interestingly enough,
Jewish law forbids
the mixing of the
kinds, they call it.
That's the mixing of
cotton or wool with linen.
And people of high
stature, the pharisees,
someone of that
caliber, would have
been buried in a
pure linen shroud.
And that's specified
in the Torah.
So the Shroud meets
those requirements.
And as I mentioned
earlier, it's a four cubit
by one cubit, exactly
the unit of measure
used in that period of time.
>> NOORY: If this
was indeed authentic,
everything has been preordained,
why leave it behind?
A record for us?
>> SCHWORTZ: Well, you know,
there's a great question
George, because it's
one of the questions,
especially when I addressed
Christian audiences--
I don't have an answer
to the question,
so I generally pose
to the audience,
why do you think that
this was left behind,
remembering that many of the
facets of what we've learned
of this shroud couldn't
have even been learned until
the 20th century?
>> NOORY: It's a calling card.
>> SCHWORTZ: It seems
to be something.
And the way I see it is this.
Anything that makes
us consider our faith,
our spirituality,
God, is a good thing.
In the modern age that we live
in, there's so little of that
that I see the Shroud
as something that,
perhaps as a guidepost.
And I always point
out to people, look,
the Shroud didn't come with
a book of instructions,
and the answer is not going
to be on a piece of cloth--
>> NOORY: No, it's
not that easy.
>> SCHWORTZ: --but in the eye
and the heart of those who look
upon it.
So perhaps it's something
there to either strengthen
people's faith or
restore their faith
or even just make them
consider their faith.
And anything that does that is
good in my book, so I see it
has great value.
>> NOORY: How about another
question for Barrie?
>> SCHWORTZ: Sure.
>> NOORY: One more here.
Who's got one?
There you go, right up front.
>> AUDIENCE: OK.
After you had discovered that
this was in fact authentic,
how did that challenge
your own beliefs?
Did anything shift in your own--
>> SCHWORTZ: Great question.
>> NOORY: Did you
break down and cry?
What happened?
>> SCHWORTZ: Well, basically
what happened was by the time I
was convinced it was
authentic it was 1995,
and I built shroud.com in 1996.
And as soon as I sort
of went public with it,
people started to asking
me a new question, what
do you believe?
The same basic question
you just asked.
Well, I mentioned
earlier I was raised
in a very orthodox Jewish
home, "Fiddler on the Roof,"
God part of
everything every day.
>> NOORY: Zero Mostel.
>> SCHWORTZ: Yeah,
Zero Mostel, exactly.
But I walked away from that at
age 13 after my bar mitzvah.
I was done.
I felt it was hypocritical.
I had no interest in it.
And I never looked back.
And now I'm 50
years old in 1996,
and all of a sudden
people want to know
what I believe about this
and what my faith is,
and I hadn't considered
that since I was a kid.
So now I'm forced at age
50 to confront my faith
for the first time
honestly as an adult.
And when I looked inside,
I found that, yeah, God
had been there all along just
waiting for me to acknowledge.
And so how many Jews can say
it was the Shroud of Turin that
led them back to
their faith in God?
>> NOORY: Exactly.
>> SCHWORTZ: And yet
that's what happened to me.
Now, of course, many
people want to know,
are you a Christian
or Messianic Jew?
And my answer is no.
And of course, that's
very disappointing
to certain audiences.
And I tell them, look, I
didn't choose this job.
I would never have chosen to
do this on my own volition.
Obviously there was
a hand guiding me
that led me to this place.
And if it's good enough for
God to have a Jew represent
the Shroud, it should be
good enough for everyone.
The other point is this,
because I know Christian dogma.
I always remind them,
relax, I'm not dead yet.
I didn't know I
would be here today.
I don't know where
I'll be tomorrow.
So for those who are
worried about my faith
and my salvation,
I always tell them
relax, because I don't know
where I'll be tomorrow.
And if I'm called
upon and I feel
moved to a point where I have
to make a decision like that,
then I will.
But as it stands now,
I'm very happy to be
that old Jewish hippie
guy who goes out and tells
the truth about the Shroud.
And that's an important word.
My job is easy.
I was only asked to do one
thing, go out and be honest.
>> NOORY: And
that's what you did.
>> SCHWORTZ: If I had to go out
and make up stories to convince
people the Shroud was authentic,
I would fail miserably.
I had a gentleman come up to
me after one of my lectures,
and he said, well, that
was a great lecture,
but you'll never convince me.
And I said, what makes you
think I care what you believe?
And he was shocked.
His eyes and his mouth got wide.
I said, listen, that's
between you and God.
Take it up with him.
>> NOORY: Well, shroud.com.
We're going to come
back and show you
an authentic replica
of the Shroud of Turin
in a moment on "Beyond Belief."
[AUDIENCE APPLAUDING]
>> NOORY: And welcome
back to "Beyond Belief."
I'm here with Barrie Schwortz.
He is talking about
the Shroud of Turin.
And this, Barrie, is an
authentic-sized replica--
>> SCHWORTZ: Correct.
>> NOORY: --of the
Shroud of Turin.
>> SCHWORTZ: This is a life-size
replica made from my original
photographs, taken in 1978.
And it was done with
large format four inch
by five inch film, two
separate photographs that
have been put together
now digitally,
to create one giant life-size
replica of the cloth.
>> NOORY: Tell us,
what are we looking at?
What are these marks right here?
>> SCHWORTZ: Yeah.
The Shroud by itself
is very confusing,
because the really
important stuff
is between these two
very distinctive scorches
and burn marks that run the
entire length of the cloth.
So what you're looking at here
that runs along this border
and again up above, those
are scorches and burns
from a fire in 1532.
>> NOORY: Wow.
So they almost lost
the entire Shroud.
>> SCHWORTZ: Almost
destroyed, exactly.
But ironically, notice that
the image which is between
was barely touched at all.
And so the Poor Clare nuns in
1534 sewed in these patches
you can see
throughout the cloth.
And when you get close,
you can see the stitching
and everything.
In 2002 those
patches were removed.
And so it doesn't look quite
the same as this anymore.
In place of these, they put
a whiter cloth behind it,
so it's a little more stark now.
>> NOORY: For a moment I thought
an owl was buried there too.
>> SCHWORTZ: I've had people
write to me and say, well,
look there's a face.
Look at the eyes and
the nose and the mouth.
It's an eagle.
It's an Indian.
And people find what
they want to find.
Our brains do a lot of
filling in of blanks.
But what, of course,
is most important
is the image of the man
which lived between these.
>> NOORY: Which is
absolutely remarkable.
>> SCHWORTZ: Right.
>> NOORY: I don't know,
those of you in the audience,
if you can see this.
This is the head--
>> SCHWORTZ: Correct
>> NOORY: --of whoever
was put in this shroud.
You can see the nose, the
eyebrows, or the marks
from the thorns.
>> SCHWORTZ: Yes, the
blood stains here.
>> NOORY: Mustache or mouth?
>> SCHWORTZ: Correct.
And a beard.
>> NOORY: Couple eyes.
The beard down here.
And explain the rest here.
>> SCHWORTZ: Sure.
And as you move
further down, of course
you're seeing some of
these diamond-shaped marks.
And these are water stains.
In 1532 when it
caught fire, they
dumped water on it
trying to put it out.
So it left water stains to
make it even more confusing.
By the way, this is a crease.
You'll see this
often under the chin.
And it's simply a creased
part of the cloth that
used to be rolled
up all the time.
So it was very pressed in.
That's now been smoothed out.
But in 1978 when we made
the photographs, of course
it was very prominent.
You can see some of the patches.
But right next to this patch,
you can see this oval shape.
That's the spear
wound in the side.
>> NOORY: That's the spear.
OK.
>> SCHWORTZ: And you can see
the blood flow from that.
If you look closely, you can
notice that the blood is still
reddish in color,
which is not common.
Blood, old blood especially,
turns black or brown
very quickly.
But the blood on the
Shroud remains red.
Because I mentioned earlier
that they treated this cloth
with saponaria.
Well, it turns
out that saponaria
has an effect on blood
keeping the blood red.
So the reason the blood is still
red on the Shroud most likely
is the treatment the
cloth was given back then.
>> NOORY: I can see
the crossed hands.
>> SCHWORTZ: You can
see the crossed hands.
You can see the blood stains
that ran down the arms.
>> NOORY: My, my, my.
>> SCHWORTZ: You can see the
back of this wrist and you can
see the hands.
You can see that it's
approximately here.
And this is a blood stain.
You can even see a
direction of blood flow.
And I've got to be careful--
>> NOORY: Can you all
make out that image?
You see it?
>> SCHWORTZ: Can you see that?
Actually, the closer you get
the more difficult it is.
And when we were examining the
Shroud in '78, there where many
times where we
had to step back--
>> NOORY: You're
too close, yeah.
>> SCHWORTZ: --about
three yards or so.
>> NOORY: How tall
was the individual?
>> SCHWORTZ: Well, again,
it's very difficult,
because this is a substrate that
can change its physical shape
based on the humidity
in which it's stored.
Approximately 5' 11".
>> NOORY: OK.
>> SCHWORTZ: That seems to be
a number that most people are
comfortable with.
Some have said, oh,
that's too tall.
Some have said, oh, no,
he was bigger than that.
It's very hard, remembering
that the image sort of gradually
fades out.
So where do you exactly begin
and end your measurements?
So it's an approximation.
The cloth can be
stretched, so that
would change the
dimensions a little bit.
But 5'11" seems to be a number
most people are comfortable
with.
As we continue down below the
hands, you can see the feet.
You can see the blood stains at
the feet on the opposite side.
We'll go the other
side in a minute.
And again, very
confusing all these
burns and scorches that
go the rest of the way.
And then, of course, at the
other end we can see here-- now
a lot of people see this
water stain and think
it's the back of the
man's head and say,
well, then he was only
a millimeter thin.
That's just a water stain, and
the back of a head begins here.
>> NOORY: From the fire.
>> SCHWORTZ: Yeah.
This is from that fire.
So the space
between the heads is
appropriate for
the cloth the way
it would have been
wrapped around body.
Here you can see many
more of the blood stains
on the back of
the head, and this
is what has been compared
with the Sudarium that's
in Spain in Oviedo.
And many of these blood
stains are the same shape
as the blood stains
on that other cloth.
That means there's a
possibility that they
both wrapped the same man.
Somebody said to me, well,
they're two separate cloths,
and how come they're
not together?
If they're not together,
they can't be authentic.
And it's like, they're
two separate cloths.
They can be separated, you know?
It is physically
possible to move one
in one direction and
one in the other.
But some of the
reasons the skeptics
want to deny this
just boggle the mind.
Now one of the things you
can see very prominently
on this side, these
are the scourge wounds.
And this was applied
with a Roman flagrum.
And when you get
close to these, you'll
see that there's like a
dark mark on either end sort
of connected with a
little rod between.
And that's because the
dumbbell-shaped weights
on the end of a Roman flagrum
leave marks just like this.
Also, from the spear
wound on the side,
the blood ran around
to the back of the body
and pulled at the
small of the back.
Now what artist is
even going to think--
>> NOORY: Nobody
would think like that.
>> SCHWORTZ: --to do that?
>> NOORY: And the bottom line is
you had it checked to see if it
was done by hand.
>> SCHWORTZ: And no less
than three different forensic
experts, including some
very well-noted ones,
Robert Bucklin,
Frederick Zugibe,
tens of thousands of
autopsies under their belt,
they've looked at this as
if this was the crime scene.
>> NOORY: Is there
any way, Barrie,
is there any way that
a human being who died,
much like what was described
in the New Testament,
without a Resurrection, could
the physical body create
an image like this
on a linen naturally?
>> SCHWORTZ: Well, it was the
theory I mentioned when we
spoke earlier, that the
chemistry that Ray Rogers had
predicted and did
some experiments with.
The question is,
could it make an image
with the level of
resolution that we have?
It would be a gas diffusion,
and it would have to be tight.
It would have to
be pretty tight.
So is it possible?
Sure, it's possible.
Is it plausible?
Well, it's more plausible than
some of the other theories that
have been presented.
Is it an absolute
answer to this?
No way.
I don't think that we
have an answer yet.
>> NOORY: And it still does
not negate the possibility that
Jesus was wrapped
in this shroud.
>> SCHWORTZ: As
a matter of fact,
I can't think of any other
logical reason why somebody
would keep a cloth that's so
blood-soaked against Jewish
law.
Remember, you weren't supposed
to take this out of the tomb.
And people often
say, well, why wasn't
this mentioned in the Gospels?
Well, it broke Jewish law twice.
>> NOORY: OK.
But again, mention the
things in the New Testament,
and let's go through
each one, starting
at the top of the head.
>> SCHWORTZ: Top of the head,
blood stains from cap or crown
of thorns.
>> NOORY: Bang.
>> SCHWORTZ: Come down here,
spear wound in the side with
blood flow from the spear
wound, the darkest blood flow
on the Shroud.
Coming further down,
blood stains on the arms
and at the back of the wrists
from the crucifixion nails.
At the feet, also
from the crucifixion--
>> NOORY: Matches perfectly.
>> SCHWORTZ: And if you
look on the backside,
the dorsal view of the man,
you'll see that not only are
there blood stains on his back,
but all the way down to his
ankles.
So when they whipped this man,
they whipped him mercilessly.
>> NOORY: Are these
all whip marks?
>> SCHWORTZ: That's correct,
all the way down to his ankles.
So they didn't just
hit him in the back.
They--
>> NOORY: He was hit--
>> SCHWORTZ: --covered him.
>> NOORY: --everywhere.
>> SCHWORTZ: And
again, you can see--
>> NOORY: Now was
that done, obviously,
before they put him
up on the cross?
>> SCHWORTZ: That was done
before he was put on the cross,
absolutely.
>> NOORY: Not afterward.
>> SCHWORTZ: After brought
off the cross, he was dead.
>> NOORY: OK.
>> SCHWORTZ: They put
the face cloth over him.
>> NOORY: So they didn't
beat him after he was dead.
>> SCHWORTZ: Yeah, they
took him to the tomb.
>> NOORY: They
tortured him even more.
>> SCHWORTZ: They took
off the face cloth.
They wrapped him in this.
There wasn't time for
a complete burial.
Look, if there had been time
for a complete anointing
and preparation of the body,
we might not have any of this.
>> NOORY: How much pain
did this man go through?
>> SCHWORTZ: The pain this
man suffered would have been
excruciating.
I can't even fathom it.
I don't think any of us can
fathom, considering that they
started beating him up the
night before in the Garden
of Gethsemane.
His face is bruised.
You can see one
cheekbone, both swollen,
one swollen more than the other.
You can tell his face
had been severely beaten.
And then you can see
these scourge marks
that cover his body.
And then, of course,
the crucifixion.
And, you know, he did not
survive that long on the cross.
Unlike some crucifixion
victims that
could be there for
many, many hours,
he died rather in a
short period of time,
probably because he
was already in shock
from all these other tortures.
>> NOORY: And there was a point
where he asked his father, God,
I don't want to do this.
>> SCHWORTZ: Yeah.
I don't blame him.
>> NOORY: I don't want
to go through this.
>> SCHWORTZ: I understood.
>> NOORY: This was
incredible pain--
>> SCHWORTZ: It was.
>> NOORY: --regardless
of who he was.
>> SCHWORTZ: And that's why I
said that in studying this over
the years, just being a human
being and realizing what one
human did to another here,
how can you not feel empathy
for this man?
>> NOORY: And why?
What did this man do to
deserve that kind of treatment?
>> SCHWORTZ: I can't
answer that, George.
But I can say this.
Just from one human
being to another,
I feel great empathy for this
man and what he suffered.
Whether it represents
my personal faith or not
is not even a relevant point.
What is relevant is that what
they describe in the Gospels is
documented here so precisely
that one skeptic once
said to me, I can't
accept the Shroud of Turin
because it's too perfect.
So my response was, so
if it was less perfect
then you'd accept it?
And he said, of course not.
And so that answered that.
Once people have made up
their minds, that's it.
They've made up their
minds, and they're not
going to change their minds.
>> NOORY: As a Jewish person--
>> SCHWORTZ: Yes.
>> NOORY: --if you can believe
that this indeed was the son
of God, what does
that do to you?
>> SCHWORTZ: Well, that would
make me a Messianic Jew.
And at this stage in
my life, I haven't yet
felt the need to
make that transition,
and I don't know
if I will or not.
But I like I said,
I believe this,
that perhaps being who
I am is exactly why I
was given this work to do.
I'm far more credible than if I
came in here as an evangelical
or a Messianic Jew, somebody
who had converted over
to Christianity, well, certainly
everybody would say, well,
of course you're
going to say that.
But the fact that I haven't
done that, I don't immediately
feel that need to do it, even
though I'm asked frequently,
I think perhaps that
gives me more credibility
as someone speaking of this
sort of disassociated--
>> NOORY: I agree.
>> SCHWORTZ: --from that
emotional side of it.
>> NOORY: And look what
it's done for your life.
You're running shroud.com.
It does not generate
advertising revenue.
>> SCHWORTZ: No.
>> NOORY: You have
your own foundation.
>> SCHWORTZ: We do.
>> NOORY: You are now
devoting your life to this.
>> SCHWORTZ: Yeah.
I never expected that to happen.
But we did form a nonprofit.
I felt that the best way
for me to demonstrate where
I'm coming from-- I think
some people thought maybe
I was doing it to
make some money.
Trust me.
I made a lot more money
as a producer and director
in Los Angeles than
I do doing this.
But I felt obliged
from the first day
that website went online to
keep advertising off of it.
There are people around
the world that view this.
Some of the ads
that might pop up
might not be any problem
for you and I but
could be very
offensive to someone
in a different culture
and a different country.
So we've made a rule from the
first day no advertising on it.
>> NOORY: Good.
>> SCHWORTZ: So we're
supported by my lectures,
by my appearances, by
the licensing of some
of the photographs
in our collection,
and by contributions,
like any other 501(c)(3).
So we always tell
people we will be
happy to accept contributions.
We have some very
nice gifts that we
give to people who
contribute to us.
>> NOORY: Will we ever get
that answer that you're looking
for, that I'm looking for, that
everybody in this audience,
that everyone who's watching
this show that they're looking
for?
Will we ever find
out if this indeed
was Jesus Christ,
the son of God?
>> SCHWORTZ: I don't believe
science will ever be able
to prove that.
So I always turn to
people and say, look,
since the answer isn't on this
cloth, look in your own heart
and decide for yourself.
>> NOORY: Barrie, thank you so
much for being on the program.
>> SCHWORTZ: My
pleasure, George.
>> NOORY: Barrie Schwortz,
ladies and gentlemen.
>> SCHWORTZ: Thank you.
>> NOORY: Shroud.com.
Thank you for watching
"Beyond Belief."
[AUDIENCE APPLAUDING]